# Insertion Sort

## Steps

1. Initialise: Start from second element
2. Compare: It with the element on the left.
3. Swap: If it's larger than the left number then swap.
4. Move left: and compare until the position is found or you reach the beginning of the sequence.
5. Repeat: for every element.

## Notes

- Number of comparisons changes depending on the sequence
- Its best when the sequence is quite close to being sorted and worst when the original sequence is backwards.
- Worse case scenario is usually used to compare different algorithms efficiency.
- Best case scenario has it taking n-1 comparisons where n refers to number of elements sorted.
- In other words if there are 10 elements then it only requires 9 comparisons.
- Worst case has the sum of first n-1 numbers.
- In other words each new element on the list adds its own index to the number of steps.
- e.g. 2nd element requires 1 step, 3rd requires 2 steps, 4th needs 3... Add em all up and you get the number of comparisons.

## Why it is important to consider the efficiency of an algorithm when developing software for real-time systems such as air traffic control.

Real time systems such as air traffic controls need immediate responses for safety and accuracy.

Having an efficient algorithm means it can work through data quickly and provide responses timely.

## How the efficiency of an algorithm impacts the scalability of the software application

Efficiency directly affects scalability. As the dataset gets larger the inefficiencies stack up and become more and more noticeable.

For example there are very efficient algorithms that will run the same speed regardless of dataset size mostly. There are also very inefficient algorithms that exponentially take longer to execute with larger data pool.

Insertion sort is the type of algorithm that gets exponentially slower with 