# The Problem Specification

Involves clearly defining the problem to be solved by defining inputs and outputs.

## Definition

Formally defines computational task. It includes:

- Description of inputs (types, format, constraints)
- Description of outputs
- Requirements or conditions the solution must satisfy.
- Optional: performance restraints. e.g. O(nlogn) or faster.

## Properties of a good algorithm

### Finiteness

Algorithm must terminate after a finite number of steps.

### Correctness

Does it produce **all** correct outputs for all valid inputs? Partial correctness 

### Unambiguity

Each step precisely/clearly defined.

### Feasibility

Is it practical to run the program on real hardware with finite resources?

e.g. Consider time complexity where using function that is O(2^n^) for large datasets can become unusable.

## Questions 

### Why is it important to consider the feasibility of an algorithm before using it in real-world scenarios?

Need to consider practical time and resource limits.

It is important to look at the algorithms real world use and how it stacks up to needs.

For example an inefficient algorithm that exponentially gets longer with work load would be a poor solution where a large workload is the norm. For example sorting videos on a social media platform would take very long.

For real time systems you need an algorithm that behaves consistently. For example an algorithm that normally takes seconds but could potentially take minutes would be bad for real time systems.

### How does unambiguity affect the correctness of an algorithm

my answer: If there are steps which are ambiguous, different people can interpret them differently and get different results. This comes from poorly describing a step.

Additions: Ambiguity also means that it is harder to test for correctness as there are vague steps you aren't sure how to scrutinise as they are poorly defined.

Unambiguity is very important as it reduces the chances of errors.

### In the context of a university timetabling problem, what does correctness mean, and how would you ensure that the timetable you create is correct?

A correct timetable ensures that there are no overlaps between classes for any particular student. It also takes into consideration that professors can't be double booked. It also does not cause clashes with lecture rooms where multiple classes can't take place at the same location.