# Week 2 modelling
https://read.kortext.com/reader/pdf/1065493/18
Some cute reading of section 1.5.

It is very likely that someone in history has had your algorithm problem but under a completely different context so it is quite difficult to find. Which is why it is better to learn general solutions which are easier said and shared.

These ideas are abstract like permutations, graphs and sets. These can be applied to real life situations like classroom scheduling and book ordering for example.

Permutations
Different arrangements and orderings of things.
E.g. [1,3, 5] and [5, 3, 1]

Subsets
Where you have a selection of items and only take out a few of what you want. With subsets the order does not matter. If you are able to get the same selection but in a different order you still succeeded in getting the subset you want.

For instance the two permutations above are considered equally valid as subsets.

Trees
Can represent a hierarchy such as family trees. Can show ancestor/descendant relationship and taxonomy.
Graphs
Used to show relationships between things 

Vertices are the points and represent cities. The edges are the roads between them.
Can be used to represent relationships and networks.
Points
Can represent locations in geometric space. For instance your house would have some coordinates used to show where it is.
Polygons
Can be used to define a region in geometric space. For instance it can show where a country border is. Looks to be a more detailed version of points.
Strings
Used to represent text.
Recursive objects
Think recursively. 🧠
For instance look at big things made out of little things of the same type. A data structure made of little versions of itself. For instance a bunch of rooms form a house. Delete 1 and you still have your house. Can be applied to above examples. You can be left with a smaller version of the above or it may break apart and give you a few smaller versions like with trees.

[5, 1, 4, 2, 4]

Permutations: You can reorder the n-1 remainder. We can delete the 5 or whatever and do permutations on the rest. 

Subsets: Any subsets of the original sequence would be the same as the n-1 version (where 4 or whatever is deleted) provided you also delete that same element.

Trees: Delete the root of a tree and you are left with some smaller trees. Delete a leaf and you have are still left with your tree just a little smaller.

Graphs: Missing 1 vertex leaves the rest so you just have a smaller graph.

Points: You can split a set down the middle and you have two smaller sets.

Polygons:  Can be split into smaller polygons.

Strings: Can be mutilated like removing a character to still have a smaller string.
NOTE:
Recursive objects need a stop point where you’ve broke them down too far.
Permutation and subsets of a 0 length sequence would be empty. The simplest tree or graph has a singular vertex. Smallest polygon is a triangle. An empty string is still a string.
2.2.2 Video task
https://onlinestudy.york.ac.uk/courses/1637/pages/2-dot-2-2-video-lecture-what-is-a-data-structure?module_item_id=128885

It is important for developers to use correct data structures. It can apparently be easy to adopt hammer and nail mentality where you like 1 data structure and keep using it in situations where it wasn’t the most appropriate.

By using correct data structure you unlock use of most efficient algorithm.

Data structure
A way of organising and storing data.

Facebook: Data structures exist that organise users allowing you to search easily through them.

Data structures are distinct from algorithms. Data structures define how data is stored and algorithms define steps to solve a problem. Algorithms typically operate on these data structures.
Sets
{3, 1, 5}
Represented with curly braces and commas.
Subsets are selections of sets. 
Sets can be used to record tags, users who liked, etc in terms of facebook.
Trees
Can be used for file systems. Each node represents a directory or file.
Top directory is called a root.

Can also represent comments and replies on a post
.
Graphs
Networks, webs or relationships
Facebook has friends adding each other using a graph. Friendships are the edges and the vertices are people.
2.2.3 Reading: Arrays and Search Algorithms
https://read.kortext.com/reader/pdf/2361440/155
4.1.3
Binary search is a recursive algorithm. It is used to locate a target value from a sorted sequence.

This is an alternative to sequential search where you loop through the whole sequence until you find the value or you exhaust the whole sequence. Sequential is used when the sequence is unordered but is less efficient. This is why things are often stored sorted for easier searching. Runs in O(n) linear time since in the worst case every element is inspected.

Binary search uses the fact that it is sorted so you can look straight in the middle and if the value is higher or lower you can look recursively in the above or below sequence. Keep going until you home in on it.

We keep 2 parameters low and high. Low being 0 and high being n-1
We find the middle parameter by doing mid = (low + high)/2

If mid is the target value then we found it yay!
If mid is too small then we set low as mid + 1 and go again.
If mid is too big then we set high as mid - 1  and go again.

You know the search failed when low > high as that interval is empty.
Big O
Sequential sort is in O(n) where at worst case you’re looking at every element so it takes as long as how many elements there are.

With binary search that homing nature means you have O(log n) time. If n is 1 billion then log n is only 30. Way more efficient.
5.2 Low level arrays
