# Arrays

To understand Arrays it's important to know about bits and bytes.

Bits: Smallest units of information.

Bytes: 8 bits

## Bytes

Each byte is given a unique memory address.

Programming languages use identifiers to keep track of memory addresses.

e.g. x -> 12

## Managing sequences

- Arrays are great as they store related values contiguously. (Next to each other without gaps)

- Array can hold each character in a string.

- In python each character requires 2 bytes as unicode.

- Cells: Contain each memory location in an array

- Indexed from 0

- To access any cell based on index it is important each cell be the same length in bytes.

Then you have the option to do (cell size * index) and adding that to the start address.

## Limitations of static arrays

Static arrays have a specified size at creation to allocate contiguous memory.

Tuples/Strings are immutable.

List class is dynamic and can be made larger.

## Lists

Under the hood there are static arrays that are built a little larger than is required. That way when new elements are added there was already that size given.

When that fills up, a new array is created of larger size and the contents get copied over.

The reference then points to the new array and the old array gets reclaimed for other uses.

## Summary

Static arrays are quicker and use less resources while dynamic ones are slower and require more resources.

# Optimising search (Sorted vs unsorted)

Sorted has the option of binary search whereas unsorted has to use linear search.

## My imagination/freestyling (Could be totally wrong)

- There are a whole load of boxes and they're in a line.
- You know which is the first one but to see what's inside you have to open them.
- Each time you open a box it takes time and some effort.
- You could check each one in a line until you find what you're after. In the worst case scenario you're checking all of them.
- O(n). However many boxes you got is however many steps so it increases linearly.
- However if you knew that the items inside are sorted (perhaps you're looking for a number and the numbers are in order) you can do binary search.

1. Peak inside that middle box and if you have it then great! If there is no middle box then you look at the one on the left.
2. If you haven't got the number then is the number bigger or smaller than you want? If the number is bigger then you know that all the boxes to the right don't have that number and can essentially be ignored. Reverse for a smaller number
3. Look for the middle box again within the smaller set and keep repeating.

This algorithm works logarithmically so as you check against longer and longer worst cases, the time increase difference is made less and less noticeable. 

## Task 1: Why is it necessary to allocate a contiguous block of memory for arrays, and how does this enable constant-time access to elements?

Computers know where each element is by adding the index * cell size to the memory address of the first element. If the elements were scattered about in memory then you'd have to store each reference.

The constant-time access comes from just being able to do that little math to find the element you want. As cell sizes are variable the math is...

memory reference + (index * cell size) = cell's memory address.

## In what scenarios would you choose a static array over a dynamic array, and vice versa?

As static arrays are memory efficient and require you to define their length at creation they are good for content that won't need changing. The benefit in this scenario is it's less resource intensive.

Where your array needs changing for instance might need to append elements, the dynamic array(lists) is your only option. Here for functionality sake you can afford that slight efficienty hit.

## 2.2.5

https://onlinestudy.york.ac.uk/courses/1637/pages/2-dot-2-5-lesson-1-key-takeaways?module_item_id=128888

## 2.2.6

A quiz. Aced it.

Gotta do the challenge afterwards.

# 2.2.7

Lottery [problem](https://onlinestudy.york.ac.uk/courses/1637/pages/2-dot-2-7-activity-modelling-a-lottery-ticket-optimisation-problem?module_item_id=128890).

- 15 possible numbers where 4 are winning numbers.
- You need 3 to win something.
- Can pick 6 numbers per ticket.
- Goal is to develop solution where minimal tickets are purchased and a win is guaranteed.
- Looks like I need to try as many combinations as possible per turn.

### Brute force

This method i'll just try everything!

- Could try counting upwards in base 15. (Already very wasteful as there will be lots of repeating numbers which are obviously not useful)
- Count up with first number upto 15.
- If that is exhausted with no solution make the second number go up by 1.
- once second number is at 15 with no solution then third number goes up by 1 etc...

### Refinement
- Need to avoid duplicates.
- Could count upwards but if the array already contains the number then it gets skipped.

e.g. [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6] -> [7, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6]

- could speed it up by changing more numbers at a time.
- can think of an array as 2 subsets we could change around.

NOTE TO FUTURE ARSHAD WHO CAN BE ASKED TO FINISH THIS! SEEMS WORTH READING THE BOOK ATTACHED.

