# Lists and Tuples

## Lists

Sometimes you're dealing with multiple values and it'd be a pain to name each one.

Being able to create a list in 1 line would be very useful.

The elements in that list are all linked together allowing you to do cool things to the whole set.

- Can contain a lot of **different** data types at the same time.
- Indexing starts at 0.
- Last element is at size of list **-1**. This is because the first element is 0 and not 1.

```py
my_list = []
# Made an empty list baby!
```

Length is 0 and accessing index 0 throws an error as it is empty.

## Adding stuff to the list

```
my_list.append(6)
```
my_list now looks like `[6]`
length of 1 and index 0 contains 6.

```py
for i in range(6):
  my_list.append(i)

print(my_list)
# Output: [6, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5]
```

## Changing values

If we want to change a value we use the assignment operator.

```py
my_list[0] = 0
print(my_list)
# Output: [0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5]
```

## Clear

Removes all items from a list.

```py
my_list.clear()
print(my_list)
# Output: []
```

## Count

Counts the number of an element

```py
for i in range(6):
  my_list.append(i)
print(my_list)
# Output: [0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5]

my_list.append(1)
my_list.count(1) -> 2
print(my_list)
# Output: [0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 1]
```

## Others

- extend
- index
- insert
- pop
- remove

## Pop

- Without an argument it just removes the last element from the list. In this case the efficiency doesn't change with the size of the list. e.g. a list of 1 and a list of 1 million will be just as fast.

- If we remove an earlier element such as index 0 with pop it means **everything** has to shift down. The last cell become **empty** so needs to be discarded. **O(n)**

```py
data.pop(0)
```

The operation is proportional to the size of the longer list means it takes even longer to pop.

> Insert has same troubles. Where you insert at the beginning of a list and everything then has to shift up.

## Tuples

- Immutable. Literally no changing.

### Creation

- Tuples look like 1, 2, 3
- Can also do (1, 2, 3)
- Can also just use tuple constructor like ([1, 2, 3])
- When creating a tuple of 1 (**singleton**)can do (1,) but for clarity its better to do tuple([1])

### Accessing tuple values

```py
my_tuple = (1, 2, 3)
print(my_tuple[0]) -> 1
print(my_tuple[-1]) -> 3
```

### Why use tuples

- Faster and require less memory
- Unchangeable means its safer as can't accidentally change
- Can be used as keys in a dictionary
- Can be used to return multiple values at once. Python lets you return a tuple in a function. You can then set multiple variables thanks to **multiple asignment/tuple unpacking**

```py
def func1() -> (1, 2, 3)
  . . .

a, b, c = func1()
print(a + b + c)
# Output: 6
# Explanation: 1 + 2 + 3
```
### Also

```py
# can store coordinates
point = (3, 5)

# Can use tuple to create multiple variables
x, y = point

# colour values
purple = (120, 0, 120)

# tuples are also the underlying principle allowing us to do this
x, y = y, x
# tuple on the right side

```
### methods
- count
- index
- in

```py
my_tuple = (1, 2, 3)
print(3 in my_tuple) -> True
```

### Nested tuples

Work just like nested arrays

```
big = ((10, 2), (3, 5))
```
