# 4.2.6 dunder method reading

- Aka magic methods because they make classes behave more seamless with python. They are automatically invoked depending on context.

For example __len__ gets called when you run len() on an object.

## Indexable Classes

There are 3 dunder methods you need to add to your class in order for it to be indexable.

__getitem__(self, index)

Above describes behaviour for grabbing an item from it's index.

__setitem__(self, index, value)

When your indexable class is also mutable you need this class. This method is invoked whenever you use the assignment operator on an index.

e.g. `friend(0) = Lilian Blot`

__delitem__(self, index)

Automatically invoked when you use the del statement on an element. (I wanna see this in action.)

## Iterable Classes

__iter__(self) - When you request an iterator on a class this function runs and describes how that behaves. The function returns an iterator object which implements the __next__ function.

__next__(self) - This runs to retrieve the next element in the iteration. When there are no more elements it should raise StopIteration.

2 above are very important for looping through in python.

## Comparable classes

Like the equality, less then greater than behaviour I've seen before.

[Comparison code](/week4/python_/comparison.py)

## Best Practices

Ensure you're consistent with the rest of python.

- eq should return a boolean

**Reflexive**: x == x, x <= x

**Symmetric**: x == y and y == x should behave the same

**transitive**: x == y and y == z means x == z

x <= y, y <= z implies x <= z

**antisymmetric**: x <= y and y <= x implies y == x

---

If a class defines __eq__ then it should also define __ne__.

@functools.total_ordering can generate the le, gt, ge stuff just off the above 2.

This **reduces boiler plate** code.

## INDEPENDENT RESEARCH

Instead of using __iter__ and __next we can delegate that to python's iterator

```py
def __iter__(self):
  return iter(self._games)
```

It saves a lot of time and is perhaps safer than creating my own index tracking method.

