# Classes in Python - Object Oriented Programming paradigm

- Classes are used to make new more complex types. They make objects.

- Variables that belong to a class are called attributes

- Functions that belong to a class are called methods. Methods describe what an object can do.

- Variables can be instance/class variables. Class variables belong to the class.

```python
class Rectangle:
  __init__(self, width, height):
    self.width = width
    self.height = height

  def area(self):
    return self.width * self.height

# alternatively

def perimiter(rect):
  return (rect.width * 2) + (rect.height * 2)

r = Rectangle(12, 15)

print(r.width) -> 12
print(r.height) -> 15
print(r.area()) -> 180
print(perimiter(r)) -> 54
```  

## __init__

- Method called immediately after the constructor __new__ creates an **instance** of an object.

- The point above is pedantic fluff. We're calling init the constructor.

- perimeter isn't indented so it isn't a method

## Data encapsulation

- Information hiding

- Hiding object data behind methods.

- Means third party users are only affiliated with what the object does and not the implementation.

- With methods we create an interface for the object that other objects should interact with.

## Atribute hiding

- Unlike java we can't just private an attribute.

- Have to follow a convention where we underscore before the _attribute.

- Other than just following a convention there is no way to truly hide an attribute.

- When you come across an attribute starting with **_underscore** you assume it is **private** and **avoid** interacting with it. It is very likely to change as it is part of the hidden implementation of the code and the person writing it **wasn't** expecting you to **directly** interact with it. When that occurs expect your code built on top to **break**. All your fault.

## Python name mangling

Is a way of privating python attributes but i CBA to check how it works.

## Guarding what an attribute can be

- In the instructor you can check for errors before instantiating an object. For example I can check for a positive width for my rectangle and if not I can raise an error.

```py
class Rectangle():
  def __init__(self, width):
    # checks we aren't producing an invalid rectangle.
    if width <= 0:
      raise ValueError('invalid')

    self.width = width

```

- As we assume these values are private and unaccessible, it is up to the person writing the class to create relevant accessors/getter functions.

## accessors/getters

- Let you access data within the object.
- When deciding getters check which attributes are implementation details and dont need accessing.
```py
# Inside a class
def width(self):
  return self._width
```

## Mutators/setters
- Used to mutate internal value
- When deciding mutators consider what needs modifying by the user and what's best hidden.

```py
# Inside a class
def increment_width(self):
  self._width += 1
```

## Decorators

@ and then name of decorator

@property is a decorator for instance.

### @property

```py

@property
def width(self):
  return self._width
```

- Now when we access `rectangle.width` it secretly runs that width function. No longer require the brackets to run that method.

### setter property

- name of property and then .setter

```py
  @width.setter
  def width(self, width):
    self._width = width

rectangle.width = 12
```

## Overall

- These decoraters make using these functions just like accessing the attribute except through methods. This allows us to use our safety nets.
