# 4.4 Lesson 2: Stacks, Queues and Deques

- Covering Abstract Data Types (ADTs).
- ADTs let us model data from behaviour instead of implementation.
- They make designing algorithms more efficient and intuitive.

## Stacks

LIFO(Last In Firt Out)

Where the last element put in is the first to be removed.

Useful for undo functionality and managing function calls.

Useful for matching delimiters: (), {}, []

### Push

Places new item on top of stack.

### Pop

Removes the top item from the top and returns it.

### Top

Check what is at the top without removing it.

### is_empty

Check is the stack is empty

### len/size

returns number of elements in the stack.

---

Above mostly runs at O(1)

## Example

[link to video with example](https://onlinestudy.york.ac.uk/courses/1637/pages/4-dot-4-1-video-lecture-abstract-data-structures-adt?module_item_id=128943)

## Queues

FIFO: First In First Out

OS use queues to manage task scheduling. Makes sure tasks are handled in order they come.

Customer service systems to ensure people are helped in appropriate order.

### Enqueue

Adds item to rear of queue.

### Dequeue

Removes and returns an item from front of queue

### First

Check what's next in line

### is_empty

Check the queue is empty

### len/size

Check how many are in the queue.

## Example

```
original queue = [20, 10, 50]
enqueue(40)

[20, 10, 50, 40]

dequeue()

[10, 50, 40]

first() -> 10

is_empty() -> False

len(queue) -> 3
```

## Queues advantages over stacks

- Order maintenance. They keep their order mostly. Stacks can look very different with regards to order over time
- Efficient handling. Great for real time stuff like task scheduling and buffering.

## Disadvantage
- Harder to access stuff that isn't just at the front and back.
- Stuff at the middle takes a while to get to.
- No backtracking. Can't put that element which popped off back on.

## Dequeues (deck/double ended queue)

Flexible data structure allowing addition and deletion from both ends.

Good for sliding window problem. Like scrolling. Great for checking palindrome as we can check values on front and back simultaneously

Dequeues can store recent actions so great for undo/redo systems.

All pretty self explanatory
- add_first

- add_list

- delete_first

- delete_last

- first

- last

- is_empty

- len/size

## Advantages

Flexible access
Efficient operations. Getting stuff from front and back is easy.

## Disadvantages

Can't access stuff at middle.
Memory overhead is increased compared to stacks and queues as you have to plan for an increase on both sides.