# 4.4.2 Reading: stacks, queues and deques

## Implementing stacks in python

Can emulate this using lists with the append method and the pop method. **However** there is all this extra functionality such as being able to get elements from the middle which we might want to get rid of.

In this case we need the **adapter pattern**

## Adapter pattern

Where we take an existing class and modify it so it matches a different class/interface.

We can do that by defining a new class that secretly has the class we want to modify. That way we can control it's behaviour from the class wrapped around that instance.

```py
class ArrayStack:
  def __init__(self):
    self.array = []

  def push(self, value):
    self.array.append(value)

  def pop(self):
    return self.array.pop()
  
  def top(self):
    return self.array[-1]
```

top, is_empty, len work in O(1) however when the internal array under the hood of that list needs resizing it can be O(n)

Amortization causes O(1) as the internal array has extra space we can gradually fill up. It is when all this extra capacity goes that we have to copy over all that data to a new array and it's efficiency goes to O(n).

When we know the max size we can perhaps give that as an argument. It is more efficient to fill up that already reserved space than it is to keep filling up an empty array over time.

## Using stacks to reverse data

If we plop 1, 2, 3 into a stack, it will come back out as 3, 2, 1 provided we pop all of themout. This is thanks to that LIFO trait.

## Matching opening and closers (delimiters)

Earlier in another section i touched on how stacks can be used to match opening and closing brackets in code editors for instance. This can also apply to HTML tags.

The function works by parsing through a sequence of delimiters and whenever you come across an opening delimiter you put it on the stack and whenever you come across a closing delimiter you compare it against the stack and if they match then you pop it off and keep going. If you reac the end and the stack is empty then **WOOHOO**. Otherise you're missing a closing delimiter.

Considering there are n number of push callas and n pop calls it runs in O(n) time even if a lot of the steps are O(1)