# Python

## High level language

Computers can only understand low level languages (machine code) so languages like python need to be processed by compilers/interpreters.

This extra processing does make it more time consuming however this disadvantage is small.

High level languages are easier and faster to write. They are also easier to read.

High level languages are easier to run on mulitple different computers. Low level languages are usually specific to their machine.

## Interpreter

It read the languages little by little. Every time you run it it requires this interpreter step.

Python is an example.

Python can be ran in interpreter mode and script mode.

In interpreter mode you can type in a line and it just returns the result ever time.

In script mode you feed it a script in a file and it just executes it line by line.

Files end in .py

## Compiler

Translates the high level language completely into an executable.

This does not need to be compiled over and over again each time it is to be ran.

## Programs

A set of instructions defining how to perform a computation.

They all...

- Input: Can get data from a device or a file.
- Output: Can display data using a device or send it to a file.
- Math: Can do mathematical operations
- Conditional execution: see if a conditional is correct before executing a piece of code
- Repetition: Can repeat the execution of a set of code.

## Formal and natural languages

Natural languages are the languages formed from human speech.

Formal languages are usually formed for a purpose. For example mathematicians and chemists have their own notation related to their work.

Programming languages are also **formal**

## Syntax

**Tokens** refer to where an incorrect symbol is used. Like words, numbers operators.

e.g. `6 £ 3`

Here the £ has no meaning.

**structure** is when the token are fine but they're in a nonsensical order.

e.g. `6 3 +`

## Formal vs Natural

Ambiguity: Formal languages have much less ambiguity than natural by design.

Redundancy: Natural language due to its ambiguity is very redundant to make the point clear. Formal languages are very concise in comparison.

Literalness: Formal languages are very literal.

# Debugging

Mistakes happen. Programming errors are called bugs.

- Syntax errors
- Runtime errors
- Semantic errors