# 14.1 Graphs

In computer science when discussing graphs we're looking at connections between entities instead of the more traditional graphs. Histograms and bar charts etc are completely unrelated to the topic.

- Graph G
- Vertices V
- Edges E

Graphs are a set of vertices connected by edges. Some freaks say nodes and arcs.

Edges can be **directed** or **undirected**. In a directed graph `(u, v)` is going from vertex u to v. In an undirected graph `(v, u)` would refer to the same edge.

Mixed graphs exist where there are a mixture of directed and undirected edges.

You can convert all graph types into a digraph just by representing each undirected edge as 2 exdges going each way. `(u,v) and (v,u)`.

The **degree** of a vertex refers to the number of edges connecting it. This can be broken down to in-degree and out-degree showing the number of incoming and outgoing edges.

A **simple** graph contains no **parallel edges**. Parallel edge in an undirected graph has **multiple edges** between 2 vertices or in a directed graph has multiple edges between the same origin and destination.

**Simple** graphs also don't contain **self loops**. A self loop is an edge that goes and returns to the same vertex.

Simple graphs contain a **set** of edges. (Remember that set means no duplicates)

**Paths** are a set of vertices and edges so that you're able to navigate them without jumping or traveling an edge backwards. They start and stop on a vertex.

**Cycles** are paths that end at the same vertex. Note a singular vertex without edges doesn't count as a cycle as there needs to be 1 edge involved.

A **simple path** has each vertex in the path distinct. A **simple cycle** is the same except the original vertex is allowed to repeat at the end. (Obviously)

**Acyclic** means that a directed graph contains no cycles. That means once you leave a node there's no way back.

## Reachability

In a directed graph reachability between 2 vertices refers to is it possible to get from 1 vertex to another. We say u reaches v if there is a directed path from u to v. Reachability in this context may only be 1 way.

In an undirected graph reachability is 2 ways. So if u reaches v then v must also reach u. This is because you can just take the same path but backwards.

## Connected

A graph is connected if for any 2 set of vertices a path exists between them.

**strongly connected** digraph means that for any set of nodes you can make the trip. So going from u to v and v to u is possible.

## Subgraphs

Graphs inside of graphs, or a graph where the vertices and edges are a subset of the original graph.

A **spanning** subgraph contains all the vertices of the original graph but not necessarily all the edges.

# 14.1.1 Graph ADT (Abstract Data Type)

We need to make 3 classes, Vertex, Edge and Graph.

The vertex is the simplest class where the objects might just hold an arbitrary piece of data given by the user.

Edges also hold a piece of data given by the user and also have methods that let you find the endpoints of it. Finding both and the the corresponding endpoint methods should be defined.

> I'm tired. Go read the book.

# 14.2.1 Edge List Structure

